# 2021-05-12

## 10:28

See [Serre's uniformity conjecture](Serre's%20uniformity%20conjecture).

## 20:46

> Source: Frobenius exact symmetric tensor categories - Pavel Etingof. IAS Geometric/modular representation theory seminar.
  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7L06K7SL5qw>

- Looking at [modular representations](modular%20representations) of finite groups.
  - [Irreducible](../irreducible.md) representations: hard, but a lot is known.
  - [Indecomposable](../indecomposable%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md) representations: very hard, very little is known.
    Hard

- See [tensor ideal](tensor%20ideal), [[Krull-Schmidt theorem]]: decomposition into indecomposables is essentially unique.
- Can take [split Grothendieck ring](split%20Grothendieck%20ring).

- [Symmetric tensor category](Symmetric%20tensor%20category) $\cat{C}$:
  - $k\dash$linear, so enriched in $\Vect_{/k}$ for $k= \bar{k}$ (no assumption on characteristic)
    So morphisms are vector spaces and composition is bilinear.
  - [Abelian](../abelian%20category.md)
  - [Artinian](../Artinian%20category.md): objects have finite length and $\dim_K \cat{C}(X, Y) < \infty$
  - [Monoidal](../Monoidal%20category.md): $(\tensor, \one)$ satisfying associativity and the pentagon axiom
  - [Symmetric monoidal](../Symmetric%20monoidal%20category.md): a symmetric braiding $X\tensor Y \mapsvia{\tau_{XY}} Y\tensor X$ such that $\tau_{YX} \circ \tau_{XY} = \id$.
  - [Rigid](../rigid%20category.md): existence of duals and morphisms $X\to X\dual$ plus rigidity axioms
  - Compatibility of additive/multiplicative structures: implied when $\tensor$ is bilinear on morphisms.
  - $\Endo_{\cat C}(\one) = k$.

- Example: $\Rep_k(G)$ the category of finite-dimensional representations of $G$.
  Take $G=1$ to recover $\Vect_{/k}$.
  - Can replace a group here by an affine [group scheme](../group%20scheme.md)

- Such a category is [tannakian](tannakian) if there exists a [fiber functor](../fiber%20functor.md): a symmetric tensor functor $F: \cat{C} \to \Vect_{/k}$.
  - Preserves tensor structure (hexagon axiom), preserves braiding, is exact. 
  - Implies automatically faithful.
  - Can take forgetful functor from representations to underlying vector space.
  - Called "fiber" because for spaces and local systems, one can take a fiber at a point
  - Deligne-Milne show this is unique.
  - Can define scheme of tensor automorphisms, $G = \ul{\Aut}^\tensor(F) \in \Grp\Sch_{/k}$.
- For an ([additive](additive%20category)) rigid symmetric monoidal category $\cat{C}_{/k}$ with $\Endo_{\cat C}(\one) = k$,
  for any $f\in \cat{C}(X, X)$ we can define its [trace](../trace%20(monoidal%20categories).md) $\Tr(f) \in \Endo_{\cat{C}}(\one)$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\one && {X\tensor X\dual} && {X\tensor X\dual} && {X\dual \tensor X} && \one
	\arrow["{\coev_X}", from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{f\tensor \id}", from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{\tau_{X, X\dual}}", from=1-5, to=1-7]
	\arrow["{\ev_X}", from=1-7, to=1-9]
	\arrow["{\Tr(f)}"', curve={height=30pt}, dashed, from=1-1, to=1-9]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwwLCJcXG9uZSJdLFsyLDAsIlhcXHRlbnNvciBYXFxkdWFsIl0sWzQsMCwiWFxcdGVuc29yIFhcXGR1YWwiXSxbNiwwLCJYXFxkdWFsIFxcdGVuc29yIFgiXSxbOCwwLCJcXG9uZSJdLFswLDEsIlxcY29ldl9YIl0sWzEsMiwiZlxcdGVuc29yIFxcaWQiXSxbMiwzLCJcXHRhdV97WCwgWFxcZHVhbH0iXSxbMyw0LCJcXGV2X1giXSxbMCw0LCJcXFRyKGYpIiwyLHsiY3VydmUiOjUsInN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX1dXQ==)

- Can define a categorical [dimension](../dimension%20of%20a%20category.md) $\dim X \in K$ as $\dim X\da \Tr(\id_X)$.
- See theory of [semisimplification](semisimplification).
- A morphism $f\in \cat{C}(X, Y)$ is **negligible** if for all $g\in \cat{C}(Y, X)$ we have $\Tr(f\circ g) = 0$.
  - Negligible morphisms form a [tensor ideal](tensor%20ideal) of morphisms: stable under composition and tensor product with other morphisms.

- Can form quotient $\bar{\cat{C}} \cat{C} / \cat{N}$: full subcategory where $\bar{\cat{C}}(X, Y) \da \cat{C}(X, Y) / \cat{N}(X, y)$, i.e. form the vector space quotient of the hom sets.
  - Still monoidal.
  - Generally nasty, but if trace of any nilpotent endomorphism in $\cat{C}$ (e.g. when $\cat{C}$ admits a monoidal functor to an abelian STC), then $\bar{\cat{C}}$ is a [semisimple](../semisimple%20category.md) STC, and in particular is abelian and every object is a direct sum of simple objects.
  - True if $\cat{C}$ is abelian: take any nilpotent endomorphism, filter by kernels of powers and take the associated graded.
  	Trace of original equals trace of associated graded, but the latter is zero.
  - Can compute trace *after* pushing through an abelian functor.
  - $\bar{\cat{C}}$ is the [semisimplification](semisimplification) of $\cat{C}$

- [simple objects](../simple%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md) in $\bar{\cat{C}}$ are [indecomposables](../indecomposable%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md) in $\cat{C}$ of nonzero dimension.
  - This procedure is forcing [Schur's Lemma](Schur's%20Lemma) to be true!

- Run into functors that aren't exact on either side, e.g. the Frobenius.
  - But still additive, and every additive functor on a *semisimple* category is exact.

- Frobenius functors: take $X^{\tensor p}$, allow cyclic permutations $c$ with $c^p = 1$, get [equivariance](../equivariant.md) with respect to $\ZZ/p$.
  - Thus $X^{\tensor p} \in \cat{C} \boxprod \Rep_{/k} \ZZ/p$, the [Deligne tensor product](Deligne%20tensor%20product).
  - Can take $\id_{\cat C} \boxprod \ss$, i.e. [semisimplification](semisimplification) on the 2nd component, to get an additive monoidal twisted-linear functor $\Fr: \cat{C} \to \cat{C} \boxprod \Ver_p$
    - Here $\Ver_p$ is a *Verlinde category*: just denotes $\bar{\cat C}$ with a modified tensor product formula...?
- Can [filter](../filtration.md) $X^{\tensor p}$ by $\Fr_i \da \ker (1-c)^i$. 
